docs/install.md, before:

   
# Installation notes
## Executables
Builds are provided with all dependencies integrated for Windows 10/11 and Ubuntu [here](https://github.com/soerendip/ms-mint/releases/latest). After double-clicking the executable, a terminal window will open, followed by the app in your default web browser. If the browser does not open automatically, please navigate to [http://localhost:9999](http://localhost:9999).

## Installation with `pip` (Recommended for Users)
The latest stable release can be installed in a standard Python 3 (>= 3.12) conda environment using `pip`:

```bash
# Create conda environment
conda create -n ms-mint-app2 python==3.12
conda activate ms-mint-app2

# Install the package normally
pip install ms-mint-app2

```

Should download and install all necessary dependencies and Mint.
Start the app via:

```
Mint
```

<!-- ## Docker
MINT is now available on DockerHub in containerized format. A container is a standard unit of software that packages up code and all its dependencies, so the application runs quickly and reliably from one computing environment to another. In contrast to a virtual machine (VM), a Docker container image is a lightweight, standalone, executable package of software that includes everything needed to run an application: code, runtime, system tools, system libraries and settings. This allows to run MINT on any computer that can run Docker.

The following command can be used to pull the latest image from docker hub.

    docker pull msmint/msmint:latest

The image can be started with:

    docker run -p 9999:9999 -v /data/:/data/  msmint/msmint:latest Mint --data-dir /data --no-browser --host 0.0.0.0


Then the tool is available in the browser at http://localhost:9999. -->

## Installation from source
If you want to contribute to MINT or use the latest unreleased features, install from source. We recommend using [conda](https://docs.anaconda.com/free/miniconda/) or [mamba](https://conda-forge.org/miniforge/) to create a virtual environment settings.

```bash
# Create conda environment
conda create -n ms-mint-app2 python==3.12
conda activate ms-mint-app2

# Get the code
git clone https://github.com/LewisResearchGroup/ms-mint-app2
cd ms-mint-app2

# Install the package normally
pip install .

# Or, install the package in development mode
pip install -e .
```

## Options
After installation Mint can be started by running `Mint`.

```console
Mint --help
usage: Mint [-h] [--no-browser] [--version] [--data-dir DATA_DIR] [--debug] [--port PORT] [--serve-path SERVE_PATH]

MINT frontend.

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  --no-browser          do not start the browser
  --version             print current version
  --data-dir            target directory for MINT data
  --debug               start MINT server in debug mode
  --port                change the port
  --serve-path          serve app at a different path e.g. '/mint/' to serve the app at 'localhost:9999/mint/'
```

If the browser does not open automatically open it manually and navigate to `http://localhost:9999`. The app's frontend is build using [Plotly-Dash](https://plot.ly/dash/) and runs locally in a browser. The GUI is under active development and may be optimized in the future.

Commit message:

docs: Update installation and usage instructions; enhance workspace and analysis sections for clarity

docs/install.md, after:

   
# Installation notes
## Executables
Builds are provided with all dependencies integrated for Windows, Linux, and macOS on the GitHub releases page:  
https://github.com/LewisResearchGroup/ms-mint-app2/releases/latest

After double-clicking the executable, a terminal window will open, followed by the app in your default web browser. If the browser does not open automatically, navigate to `http://localhost:9999` (or the port printed in the terminal log).

> **Note**: If port 9999 is already in use, MINT automatically selects a free port and prints a warning with the new URL.

## Installation with `pip` (Recommended for Users)
The latest stable release can be installed in a Python 3.12+ environment using `pip`:

```bash
# Create conda environment
conda create -n ms-mint-app2 python==3.12
conda activate ms-mint-app2

# Install the package normally
pip install ms-mint-app2

```

This will download and install all necessary dependencies and MINT.  
Start the app via:

```
Mint
```

<!-- ## Docker
MINT is now available on DockerHub in containerized format. A container is a standard unit of software that packages up code and all its dependencies, so the application runs quickly and reliably from one computing environment to another. In contrast to a virtual machine (VM), a Docker container image is a lightweight, standalone, executable package of software that includes everything needed to run an application: code, runtime, system tools, system libraries and settings. This allows to run MINT on any computer that can run Docker.

The following command can be used to pull the latest image from docker hub.

    docker pull msmint/msmint:latest

The image can be started with:

    docker run -p 9999:9999 -v /data/:/data/  msmint/msmint:latest Mint --data-dir /data --no-browser --host 0.0.0.0


Then the tool is available in the browser at http://localhost:9999. -->

## Installation from source
If you want to contribute to MINT or use the latest unreleased features, install from source. We recommend using [conda](https://docs.anaconda.com/free/miniconda/) or [mamba](https://conda-forge.org/miniforge/) to create a virtual environment.

```bash
# Create conda environment
conda create -n ms-mint-app2 python==3.12
conda activate ms-mint-app2

# Get the code
git clone https://github.com/LewisResearchGroup/ms-mint-app2
cd ms-mint-app2

# Install the package normally
pip install .

# Or, install the package in development mode
pip install -e .
```

## Options
After installation, MINT can be started by running `Mint`.

```console
Mint --help
usage: Mint [-h] [--no-browser] [--version] [--data-dir DATA_DIR] [--debug] [--port PORT] [--host HOST] [--ncpu NCPU] [--local] [--config CONFIG] [--repo-path REPO_PATH] [--fallback-repo-path FALLBACK_REPO_PATH] [--skip-update] [--serve-path SERVE_PATH]

MINT frontend.

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  --no-browser          do not start the browser
  --version             print current version
  --data-dir            target directory for MINT data
  --debug               start MINT server in debug mode
  --port                change the port (default: 9999)
  --host                host binding address (default: 127.0.0.1)
  --ncpu                number of CPUs to use for processing
  --local               run locally and use the File System Access API (best for desktop usage)
  --config              path to JSON config (auto-created if missing)
  --repo-path           repo path or VCS URL for auto-update on launch
  --fallback-repo-path  fallback repo path if the primary update fails
  --skip-update         skip auto-update before launching
  --serve-path          (deprecated) serve app at a different path, e.g. '/mint/'
```

If the browser does not open automatically, open it manually and navigate to `http://localhost:9999` (or the port shown in the terminal). The app's frontend is built using [Plotly-Dash](https://plot.ly/dash/) and runs locally in a browser. The GUI is under active development and may be optimized in the future.

### Local file access
MINT uses the File System Access API (when available) to select local files without uploading them to a server. This works best in Chromium-based browsers. If the API is not supported, use the built-in server file browser to select files from the machine running MINT.

### Configuration file
On first run, MINT creates a JSON config file (default: `~/.mint_config.json`) that can store:
- `repo_path` and `fallback_repo_path` (for auto-update on launch)
- `data_dir` (default MINT data directory)
